README.md, before:

# pendulum

These files go with the article *The crane operator's trick an other shenanigans with a pendulum*

## pendulum.py
The file pendulum.py is a python module with several classes.

### simplependulum
The class simplependulum can be used to simulate a simple pendulum, the crane in the article.
The following differential equation is solve numerically.


$m\ddot{x}_m + c\dot{x}_m + m \frac{g}{l}(x_m-x_c) = 0$ or  $\ddot{x}_m +\frac{c}{m} \dot{x}_m+ \omega_o^2 (x_m-x_c)=0$.

With  $\omega_o^2=\frac{g}{l}$ and $\xi = \frac{c}{2 m\omega_o}$, it reads,

$$
\ddot{x}_m =- 2\xi\omega_o \dot{x}_m -\omega_o^2 x_m + \omega_o^2 x_c.
$$

This second order differential equation can be reduced to a first order differential equation by using the variable

$x=\left( \begin{array}{c} x_m\\\dot{x}_m\end{array} \right)$

Hence,
$$\left( \begin{array}{c} \dot{x}_m\\\ddot{x}_m\end{array} \right) = 
\left( \begin{array}{cc} 0 &1\\ -\omega_o^2 & -2\xi\omega_o\end{array} \right) 
\left( \begin{array}{c} x_m\\\dot{x}_m\end{array} \right) + 
\omega^2 \left( \begin{array}{c} 0\\ x_c \end{array} \right) $$

In other words,
$$
\dot{x} =M x + \omega^2 F.
$$

This equation is solved with the Runge-Kutta method, see [Wiki](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Runge%E2%80%93Kutta_methods)


The simulation is setup by

`pend = pendulum.simplependulum(x0=1,v0=0,w0=2*np.pi/T0,xi=0.1,trolley_pos=func)`

where x0 and v0 give the initial conditionof the pendulum at t=0 and w0 and xi are the paramters discussed above. The argument trolley_pos points at a fucntion that returns the trolley position as a function of time. If it's left out the trolley is assumed to be at 0 at all times.


One the simulation is setup, it can be run, by calling

`pend.go(30)`

where the argument is the number of simulated seconds the simulation runs. In this case the trajectory of the pendulum is calculated for 30 s.The function does not return anything. The ouptut of the simulation is stored in five lists owned by the instance. They are

- `pend.out_t`    : time
- `pend.out_xm`   : position of the mass
- `pend.out_vm`   : velocity of the mass
- `pend.out_xc`   : position of the trolley
- `pend.out_vc`   : velocity of the trolley

### torsionpendulum

Analog to simplependulum, setting the class up requires one more parameter, the moment of inertia I of the pendulum. It is:
`pend = pendulum. torsionpendulum(theta0=0,theta_dot0=0,w0=0.0523598,xi=0,I=0.076233,ext_torque=None,dt =1)`

The intial conditions are called theta0 and theta_dot0. The former in rad, the latter in rad/s.

The go command is the same as in simplependulum. The return lists are called.

- `pend.out_t`         : time
- `pend.out_theta`     : theta, i.e., angular excursion of the torsion pendulum
- `pend.out_theta_dot` : time derivative of theta
- `pend.out_n`         : external torque
- `pend.out_n_dot`     : time derivative of the external torque




### Jupyter notebooks

Several jupyter notebooks demonstrate the pendulum class.


#### section2.ipynb
Shows simulations of the topics that are discussed in section 2 of the article.


#### section3.ipynb
Shows simulations of the topics that are discussed in section 3 of the article.

Commit message:

section3.py section4.py supplemental_material?

README.md, after:

# pendulum
The following files go with the article *The crane operator's trick an other shenanigans with a pendulum*


## pendulum.py
The file pendulum.py is a python module with several classes.
## section2.ipynb
Jupyter notebook that shows the physics in section 2 of the paper.
## section3.ipynb
Jupyter notebook that shows the physcis in section 3 of the paper.
## section4.ipynb
Jupyter notebook that shows the physics in section 4 of the paper.
## section2.py
Python script that shows the physics in section 2 of the paper.
## section3.py
Python script that shows the physics in section 3 of the paper.
## section4.py
Python script that shows the physics in section 4 of the paper.
## supplemental_material.pdf
More math on the torsion pendulum

## Description of the classes in pendulum.py

### simplependulum
The class simplependulum can be used to simulate a simple pendulum, the crane in the article.
The following differential equation is solve numerically.


$m\ddot{x}_m + c\dot{x}_m + m \frac{g}{l}(x_m-x_c) = 0$ or  $\ddot{x}_m +\frac{c}{m} \dot{x}_m+ \omega_o^2 (x_m-x_c)=0$.

With  $\omega_o^2=\frac{g}{l}$ and $\xi = \frac{c}{2 m\omega_o}$, it reads,

$$
\ddot{x}_m =- 2\xi\omega_o \dot{x}_m -\omega_o^2 x_m + \omega_o^2 x_c.
$$

This second order differential equation can be reduced to a first order differential equation by using the variable

$x=\left( \begin{array}{c} x_m\\\dot{x}_m\end{array} \right)$

Hence,
$$\left( \begin{array}{c} \dot{x}_m\\\ddot{x}_m\end{array} \right) = 
\left( \begin{array}{cc} 0 &1\\ -\omega_o^2 & -2\xi\omega_o\end{array} \right) 
\left( \begin{array}{c} x_m\\\dot{x}_m\end{array} \right) + 
\omega^2 \left( \begin{array}{c} 0\\ x_c \end{array} \right) $$

In other words,
$$
\dot{x} =M x + \omega^2 F.
$$

This equation is solved with the Runge-Kutta method, see [Wiki](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Runge%E2%80%93Kutta_methods)


The simulation is setup by

`pend = pendulum.simplependulum(x0=1,v0=0,w0=2*np.pi/T0,xi=0.1,trolley_pos=func)`

where x0 and v0 give the initial conditionof the pendulum at t=0 and w0 and xi are the paramters discussed above. The argument trolley_pos points at a fucntion that returns the trolley position as a function of time. If it's left out the trolley is assumed to be at 0 at all times.


One the simulation is setup, it can be run, by calling

`pend.go(30)`

where the argument is the number of simulated seconds the simulation runs. In this case the trajectory of the pendulum is calculated for 30 s.The function does not return anything. The ouptut of the simulation is stored in five lists owned by the instance. They are

- `pend.out_t`    : time
- `pend.out_xm`   : position of the mass
- `pend.out_vm`   : velocity of the mass
- `pend.out_xc`   : position of the trolley
- `pend.out_vc`   : velocity of the trolley

### torsionpendulum

Analog to simplependulum, setting the class up requires one more parameter, the moment of inertia I of the pendulum. It is:
`pend = pendulum. torsionpendulum(theta0=0,theta_dot0=0,w0=0.0523598,xi=0,I=0.076233,ext_torque=None,dt =1)`

The intial conditions are called theta0 and theta_dot0. The former in rad, the latter in rad/s.

The go command is the same as in simplependulum. The return lists are called.

- `pend.out_t`         : time
- `pend.out_theta`     : theta, i.e., angular excursion of the torsion pendulum
- `pend.out_theta_dot` : time derivative of theta
- `pend.out_n`         : external torque
- `pend.out_n_dot`     : time derivative of the external torque
